KEP 1847 StatefulSet autodelete documentation (#30597)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset.md

Please note that this field only works if you enable the `StatefulSetMinReadySeconds` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/).

> #### PersistentVolumeClaim Policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PersistentVolumeClaim retention
```

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.23" state="alpha" >}}

`.spec.persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` is an optional field that controls if and how PVCs are deleted during the lifecycle of a StatefulSet. There are two policies that are used.

>   - `whenDeleted` is applied when the StatefulSet is deleted.
>   - `whenScaled` is applied when the replica count of the StatefulSet is reduced, for example when scaling down the set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`whenDeleted`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the StatefulSet is deleted

`whenScaled`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the replica count of
  the StatefulSet   is reduced; for example, when scaling down the set.
```

> These may each be set to either `Delete` or `Retain`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each policy that you can configure, you can set the value to either `Delete` or `Retain`.
```

  - `Delete`. The PVCs created from the StatefulSet `volumeClaimTemplate` are deleted, for each Pod affected by the policy. With the `whenDeleted` policy, as all Pods are deleted when the Statefulset is deleted, all PVCs from the `volumeClaimTemplate` are deleted. With the `whenScaled` policy, only PVCs corresponding to Pod replicas being scaled down are deleted. Note PVC deletion only happens for this particular kind of Pod deletion. For example, Pods that are deleted due to being killed for rescheduling on a different node are not affected, and the PVCs will live to migrate to the new node.
  - `Retain`. PVCs from the `volumeClaimTemplate` are not affected when their Pod is deleted. This is the behavior before this new feature.
  
The default for policies is `Retain`, matching the StatefulSet behavior before this new feature.

Here is an example policy.

> ```

Reviewer: nit: append `yaml` to mark this as YAML.

Author: done

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
...
spec:
  persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy:
    whenDeleted: Retain
    whenScaled: Delete
...
```

> The StatefulSet [controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/controller/) adds owner references to PVCs, which are then deleted by the garbage collector. When the whenDeleted policy is Delete, an owner reference to the StatefulSet instance is placed on all PVCs. The whenScaled policy is a little more complicated, because it adds an owner reference to the PVC’s pod, and you usually don’t want all Pod deletions to remove their PVCs. This means that the StatefulSet controller must wait for scale-down events (when the StatefulSet replica count is changed to be less than the number of replicas currently in the cluster), and in that case add pod owner references only to the scaled down Pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The StatefulSet {{<glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller">}} adds
[owner references](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/owners-dependents/#owner-references-in-object-specifications) to its PVCs, which are then deleted by the
{{<glossary_tooltip text="garbage collector" term_id="garbage-collection">}} at the appropriate time.
When you set the `whenDeleted` policy to `Delete`, an owner reference to the StatefulSet instance
is placed on all PVCs associated with that StatefulSet.

The `whenScaled` policy is a little more complicated, because it adds an owner reference to the
PVC’s pod, and you usually don’t want Pod deletions to remove the associated PVCs. This means that the
StatefulSet controller must wait for scale-down events (when the StatefulSet replica count is changed
to be less than the number of replicas currently in the cluster), and then sets pod owner references
only on the specific Pods that are due to be terminated due to the scale-down action.
```

> This policy is behind the `StatefulSetAutoDeletePVC` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/). This must be enabled to use the PVC retention policy.

Author: I kept your change, so will omit this.

## PersistentVolumeClaim retention

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.23" state="alpha" >}}

The optional `.spec.persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` field controls if
and how PVCs are deleted during the lifecycle of a StatefulSet. You must enable the
`StatefulSetAutoDeletePVC` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
to use this field. Once enabled, there are two policies you can configure for each
StatefulSet:

`whenDeleted`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the StatefulSet is deleted

`whenScaled`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the replica count of
  the StatefulSet   is reduced; for example, when scaling down the set.
  
For each policy that you can configure, you can set the value to either `Delete` or `Retain`.

`Delete`
: The PVCs created from the StatefulSet `volumeClaimTemplate` are deleted, for
  each Pod affected by the policy. With the `whenDeleted` policy, as all Pods are
  deleted when the Statefulset is deleted, all PVCs from the `volumeClaimTemplate`
  are deleted.

>   With the `whenScaled` policy, only PVCs corresponding to Pod replicas being scaled

Reviewer 2: Just a note about the hugo markdown rederer, if you'd like this "With the `whenScaled`..." line to show up on the new line, you'll need to add another carriage return before it. Otherwise the renderer will put it in the same paragraph as the "The PVCs created..."

```suggestion

  With the `whenScaled` policy, only PVCs corresponding to Pod replicas being scaled
```

Reviewer: I think if you did add the extra blank line, this would end the `<dd>` and `<dl>` elements in the final Markdown.
Another way to get a line break (if desired - and I don't think any is strictly needed) is to ensure that the line:
```markdown
  are deleted.
```
ends with **exactly two** spaces.

Author: Thanks, I don't think the line break is needed, I've reflowed it to make it more clear.

  down are deleted.

`Retain` (default)
: PVCs from the `volumeClaimTemplate` are not affected when their Pod is
  deleted. This is the behavior before this new feature.

Bear in mind that these policies **only** apply when Pods are being removed due to the
StatefulSet being deleted or scaled down. For example, if a Pod associated with a StatefulSet
fails due to node failure, and the control plane creates a replacement Pod, the StatefulSet
retains the existing PVC.  The existing volume is unaffected, and the cluster will attach it to
the node where the new Pod is about to launch.
  

> The default for policies is `Retain`, matching the StatefulSet behavior before this new feature.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
The default for policies is `Retain`, matching the StatefulSet behavior before this feature.
```
We follow a largely unwritten, Kubernetes-flavored version of [https://developers.google.com/style/timeless-documentation](https://developers.google.com/style/timeless-documentation)&mdash;and with that in mind, we should not document the feature as “new”.

StatefulSet will then begin to recreate the Pods using the reverted template.

## PersistentVolumeClaim retention

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.23" state="alpha" >}}

The optional `.spec.persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` field controls if
and how PVCs are deleted during the lifecycle of a StatefulSet. You must enable the
`StatefulSetAutoDeletePVC` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
to use this field. Once enabled, there are two policies you can configure for each
StatefulSet:

`whenDeleted`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the StatefulSet is deleted

`whenScaled`
: configures the volume retention behavior that applies when the replica count of
  the StatefulSet   is reduced; for example, when scaling down the set.
  
For each policy that you can configure, you can set the value to either `Delete` or `Retain`.

`Delete`

> : The PVCs created from the StatefulSet `volumeClaimTemplate` are deleted, for

Reviewer 3: The comma is a bit weird here but that may just be me.

Author: Looks about the same to me, so I'll take it out :-)

  each Pod affected by the policy. With the `whenDeleted` policy, as all Pods are

>   deleted when the Statefulset is deleted, all PVCs from the `volumeClaimTemplate`

Reviewer 3: This clause `as all Pods are deleted when the Statefulset is deleted` is a bit difficult to follow.  Might suggest

> With the `whenDeleted` policy, each PVC from the `volumeClaimTemplate` will be deleted after the corresponding pod is deleted. [ed: you may want to describe exactly the ordering here - does is the ordering dependent on the foreground policy?  Does the controller wait until it observes the pod is fully deleted?  These help clarify how someone knows what to debug when it goes wrong].  

(see my editor note, I think we should clarify the time order in words of what waits before what)

Author: Improved the wording, or tried to, in the context of your comment below.

  
The default for policies is `Retain`, matching the StatefulSet behavior before this new feature.

Here is an example policy.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
...
spec:
  persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy:
    whenDeleted: Retain
    whenScaled: Delete
...
```

The StatefulSet {{<glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller">}} adds
[owner references](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/owners-dependents/#owner-references-in-object-specifications) to its PVCs, which are then deleted by the
{{<glossary_tooltip text="garbage collector" term_id="garbage-collection">}} at the appropriate time.
When you set the `whenDeleted` policy to `Delete`, an owner reference to the StatefulSet instance
is placed on all PVCs associated with that StatefulSet.

The `whenScaled` policy is a little more complicated, because it adds an owner reference to the
PVC’s pod, and you usually don’t want Pod deletions to remove the associated PVCs. This means that the
StatefulSet controller must wait for scale-down events (when the StatefulSet replica count is changed
to be less than the number of replicas currently in the cluster), and then sets pod owner references

> only on the specific Pods that are due to be terminated due to the scale-down action.

Reviewer 3: Huh... reading this sounds complicated :).  Does this mean that the stateful set controller during a restart can "lose" a scale down event?  Or is the event caught because there is a PVC still there when the controller restarts?   As a user, I need to know whether force deleting a pod while the controller is down will result in the PVC being left around or not (probably as an api reviewer too :)), and this paragraph doesn't quite give clarity on that.

Author: Clarified, hopefully.

references](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/owners-dependents/#owner-references-in-object-specifications)
to its PVCs, which are then deleted by the {{<glossary_tooltip text="garbage collector"
term_id="garbage-collection">}} after the Pod is terminated. This enables the Pod to
cleanly unmount all volumes before the PVCs are deleted (and before the backing PV and
volume are deleted, depending on the retain policy).  When you set the `whenDeleted`
policy to `Delete`, an owner reference to the StatefulSet instance is placed on all PVCs
associated with that StatefulSet.

The `whenScaled` policy must delete PVCs only when a Pod is scaled down, and not when a
Pod is deleted for another reason. When reconciling, the StatefulSet controller compares
its desired replica count to the actual Pods present on the cluster. Any StatefulSet Pod
whose id greater than the replica count is condemned and marked for deletion. If the
`whenScaled` policy is `Delete`, the condemned Pods are first set as owners to the
associated StatefulSet template PVCs, before the Pod is deleted. This causes the PVCs
to be garbage collected after only the condemned Pods have terminated.

> This meanas that if the controller crashes and restarts, no Pod will be deleted before its

Reviewer 3: Typo `means`

Author: oops thx

owner reference has been updated appropriate to the policy. If a condemned Pod is
force-deleted while the controller is down, the owner reference may or may not have been
set up, depending on when the controller crashed. It may take several reconcile loops to
update the owner references, so some condemned Pods may have set up owner references and
other may not. For this reason we recommend waiting for the controller to come back up,
which will verify owner references before terminating Pods. If that is not possible, the

> operator should verify the owner references on PVCs to ensure the expected objects are

Reviewer 3: And this is generally true but it's great to call it out.  From a conceptual perspective, we're saying "if controllers aren't functioning properly and you mess with the pods, it's on you, but if you do, here's what you should do" which is great.

Author: Thanks for the feedback! I'm glad this point is helpful.
